# Multi-Asset Binomial Options Pricing Model
By Jonathan Newman

## Overview
An option is a type of contingent claim, a derivative financial instrument that affords the holder the right, but not the obligation to exercise the option. This action of exercising the option typically consists of the right to either buy (via a call option) or sell (via a put option) a specified asset at an agreed upon strike price. Only European-type options will be considered here, whose characteristics are; path-independency (pay-off of the option is not dependent on "path" of underlying price before maturity), and its ability to only be exercised on its expiry date.

Key research around derivatives revolves around the adequate pricing of options for which option writers, researchers etc can use to find an efficient price, known as a "no-arbitrage" price; a key concept and axiom that must always be satisfied in models, theoretically ensuring that risk-free arbitrate profits cannot be made via long/short strategies involving the underlying asset and risk-free assets (i.e. bonds). Perhaps the most popular model is the binomial options pricing model. The binomial options pricing model operates in "discrete" time, where time is modelled as a finite set of indivisible and distinct steps. Presently, the binomial model has been succeeded by the superior (and far more complex) Black-Scholes-Merton (BSM) Model in industry. The principle difference between the two models is the difference in how time is perceved; with the BSM model considering time to be an infinitely divisible, "continuous" time interval.

This project explores the extension of the standard binomial options pricing model into the realms of multi-asset "basket" options, which as the name suggests, are options whose values are contingent on the prices of not one, but multiple assets over time. This scales the two-dimensional single-asset model (which only considers all possible paths the asset price can take) into a three-dimensional model, which now has to factor every possible combination of paths of all assets simultaneously. A key academic source used for this project is the work by Kędra, Libman, Steblovskaya (2022). Furthermore, this project takes the additional leap of incorporating real-world financial data, namely a list of user-definable stocks they'd like to incorporate into the option. 

## Installation
This project was created as a Jupyter Lab file (.ipynb), and as such, I'd recommend any compatible IDE, such as Jupyter's web-based platform, DataSpell, or VSCode, for instance. numpy, pandas, yfinance, and itertools are required libraries for use of the program.

## Usage
The program should be reasonably straightforward, particularly for those familiar with the concepts and variables, and how they interact. Being a Jupyter file, the code is naturally broken down into cells, with each cell representing a particular "function" (not in its python sense), or "procedure" that is carried out in order to find a price. For use, there is a cell titled "User Inputs and Preliminaries", which is where the user should input the required information for each variable. These variables are:

* stocks: This is a list containing strings of stock tickers the user would like to use. You are freely able to add or remove tickers.
* asset_count: No modification needed
* time_count: This is an integer representing the number of time-steps you'd like the model to use. This can be 5, representing 5 days, weeks, or years, for instance. Note that currently, each time step is worth 1-day, as denoted in the variable "delta_t" in the cell "Finding Initial Prices and Factors".
* risk_free_rate: This is simply the risk free rate, i.e. interest rate. Typically this is set to 1 for simplicity, though in reality, especially when each time-step is worth 1-day, it is very close to 1 and may not be worth changing. A very important note is the preservation of the condition D<R<U, which specifies that up and down factors must be greater or less than the risk-free rate respectively, at all times. This is essential for the preservation of the axiom of no-arbitrage, critical for the computation of an efficient no-arbitrage price. Thus, it is better to be left at 1.
* strike_price: This is the "agreed-upon price" for which you'd be given the option to buy or sell an asset. For example, for a call option, increasing the strike price will have an effect of reducing the value of the option as this would diminish its payoff, and vice versa.
* option_type: This is a string which should either be "call" or "put".
* selected_time: For valuing a basic option, this should be left at zero. If this is to be changed, it must take a value LESS than the "time_count". This is because we cannot specify a period beyond the duration of the option, only within it. A non-zero value will specify a point of time within the option, from which the user will be asked to define binary "scenarios" that will value the option based on these pre-specified price movement scenarios. For example, say there are two stocks, and four time-steps. We can set the "selected_time" to be 2. This would allow us to specify up to two scenarios for both assets. We can then input, say, 1 0 for the first asset, representing an upwards price movement followed by a downwards price movement. For the second asset, we can specify, for example, 0 0, which would represent two downward price movements. From here, the option will be valued given this information. These inputs must be binary and separated by spaces!

## Performance

I'd like to advise that this model, given its high-dimensionality, scales very poorly for large models. Given its binomial nature and reliance on permutations, there are significant performance penalties when more than six assets and six time-steps are used. It fails to work at 8 x 8. In my estimation, this is a unfixable intrinsic flaw.
